content/_index.md, before:

---
title: Introduction
type: docs
bookToc: false
description: 'The Digital Humanities Climate Coalition toolkit for Climate Justice in humanities research.'
---

![The Digital Humanities Climate Coalition](DCHH_FINAL_LOWER_CASE_HAZARD.png)


{{< columns >}}
## DH Benelux 2022 Workshop (Luxembourg)

Access the workshop notes on this [Etherpad Document](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/DHCC-tool-kit-workshop).

In this workshop we will underscore that as humanities researchers it is our role to probe the values, the power structures, and the future imaginaries that underpin sustainable solutions. Moreover, given the immense and monopolistic power wielded by the global tech sector, and the critiques of this power that are part of the Digital Humanities, this community is well positioned to create change and demonstrate to our colleagues and collaborators how change can happen. Our use of technology and infrastructure should be informed by the ways corporate economic, cultural, and scientific power perpetuates and exacerbates the crisis. Choosing a hardware or hosting provider, for example, should mean considering direct environmental impacts, broader environmental policies and record of the provider, and more broadly still, the kinds of collective future that such a collaborative encounter presupposes. We should be able to candidly explore the complex and sometimes contradictory nature of our ecological impact: we should be able to measure and model where possible, while also creating context around our measurements, flagging uncertainties, and advocating for transforming wider conditions.

Themes: \
(a) decarbonising our research and teaching,\
(b) working at the intersection of humanities and digital technology to understand the role of data science in climate transition and climate justice,\
(c) transforming DH (and knowledge institutions) within broader transformations of society.

![DHCC.jpg](DCHH_FINAL_HAZARD.png)

<--->
## Toolkit

The toolkit has multiple pathways, here is one suggestion to navigate through the chapters:

- [Introduction]({{< relref path="./toolkit/introduction.md" >}})
- [Minimal Computing]({{< relref path="./toolkit/minimal-computing.md" >}})
- [Maximal Computing]({{< relref path="./toolkit/maximal-computing.md" >}})
- [Project Planning]({{< relref path="./toolkit/project-planning.md" >}})
- [Advocating Within Your Institution]({{< relref path="./toolkit/advocating.md" >}})
- [Decision Trees]({{< relref path="./toolkit/decision-trees.html" >}})
- [Climate Change FAQs]({{< relref path="./toolkit/climate-change-faqs.md" >}})
{{< /columns >}}


### A Manifesto

[Digital Humanities and the Climate Crisis](https://dhc-barnard.github.io/envdh/)

“The digital is material. As digital humanists, every project we create, every software application we use, every piece of hardware we purchase impacts our environment. [...] As humanities researchers, it is also our role to probe the values, the power structures, and the future imaginaries that underpin sustainable solutions.”

---

{{< columns >}}

### A Researcher Guide to Writing a Climate Justice Oriented Data Management Plan

Our Information, Measurement and Practice Group has published this guide which aims to help researchers think through the climate-related implications of decisions about data management and project planning.  It includes an annotated DMP.

DHCC Information, Measurement and Practice Action Group. (2022). A Researcher Guide to Writing a Climate Justice Oriented Data Management Plan (v0.6). Zenodo. [![button](./zenodo.6451499.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6451499)

<--->
![Beekeeper](beekeeper.jpg)

{{< /columns >}}

---

Commit message:

changed index to include workshop page and added workshop pg

content/_index.md, after:

---
title: Introduction
type: docs
bookToc: false
description: 'The Digital Humanities Climate Coalition toolkit for Climate Justice in humanities research.'
---

![The Digital Humanities Climate Coalition](DCHH_FINAL_LOWER_CASE_HAZARD.png)


{{< columns >}}
## DH Benelux 2022 Workshop (Luxembourg)

The DHCC hosted an afternoon workshop on 31 May 2022 for the DH Benelux workshop.

Themes: \
(a) decarbonising our research and teaching,\
(b) working at the intersection of humanities and digital technology to understand the role of data science in climate transition and climate justice,\
(c) transforming DH (and knowledge institutions) within broader transformations of society.

For more information, see the workshop page.

![DHCC.jpg](DCHH_FINAL_HAZARD.png)

<--->
## Toolkit

The toolkit has multiple pathways, here is one suggestion to navigate through the chapters:

- [Introduction]({{< relref path="./toolkit/introduction.md" >}})
- [Minimal Computing]({{< relref path="./toolkit/minimal-computing.md" >}})
- [Maximal Computing]({{< relref path="./toolkit/maximal-computing.md" >}})
- [Project Planning]({{< relref path="./toolkit/project-planning.md" >}})
- [Advocating Within Your Institution]({{< relref path="./toolkit/advocating.md" >}})
- [Decision Trees]({{< relref path="./toolkit/decision-trees.html" >}})
- [Climate Change FAQs]({{< relref path="./toolkit/climate-change-faqs.md" >}})
{{< /columns >}}


### A Manifesto

[Digital Humanities and the Climate Crisis](https://dhc-barnard.github.io/envdh/)

“The digital is material. As digital humanists, every project we create, every software application we use, every piece of hardware we purchase impacts our environment. [...] As humanities researchers, it is also our role to probe the values, the power structures, and the future imaginaries that underpin sustainable solutions.”

---

{{< columns >}}

### A Researcher Guide to Writing a Climate Justice Oriented Data Management Plan

Our Information, Measurement and Practice Group has published this guide which aims to help researchers think through the climate-related implications of decisions about data management and project planning.  It includes an annotated DMP.

DHCC Information, Measurement and Practice Action Group. (2022). A Researcher Guide to Writing a Climate Justice Oriented Data Management Plan (v0.6). Zenodo. [![button](./zenodo.6451499.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6451499)

<--->
![Beekeeper](beekeeper.jpg)

{{< /columns >}}

---
